GWEN IFILL: Good evening.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
GOV.
RICK SCOTT (R), Florida: If
you're watching
and living in an evacuation
zone, you need
to leave now.
GWEN IFILL: A state of emergency
in Florida,
Georgia and South Carolina, as
the deadly
Hurricane Matthew gains
strength, barreling
toward the U.S.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Then, in our
series on the
issues shaping this election, we
take a look
at where the candidates stand
and differ on
guns.
GWEN IFILL: And Jeffrey Brown
sits down with
the master of horror, Stephen
King, to talk
about his new novel and the art
of writing.
STEPHEN KING, Author, "End of
Watch": I got
where the story leads.
And sometimes it's a little bit
outrageous.
And I relish that.
I sort of want to be as much on
the edge as
I can.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: It keeps coming
closer and getting
stronger.
Hurricane Matthew's winds are
back up to 140
miles an hour as it plows toward
Florida tonight,
in its wake, up to 140 dead,
nearly all of
them in the island nation of
Haiti.
From the skies above
Southwestern Haiti, the
destruction looks complete.
Entire neighborhoods have been
wiped out in
Jeremie, the region's main city.
MAN (through translator): All
the money we
had has been lost.
Everything is lost.
We're lost.
We don't know.
We could see the destruction,
and we asked
for help, but no.
GWEN IFILL: Aid workers are
finally getting
to some of the most heavily
damaged areas,
and they're reporting near total
losses.
Holly Frew with the aid
organization CARE
is monitoring the situation from
the Haitian
capital of Port-au-Prince.
HOLLY FREW, CARE: About 80
percent of the
buildings and homes are damaged
or destroyed
in that area.
Everyone is kind of in a state
of shock.
It's just utter devastation in
that western
side of southern bluff where the
hurricane
eye just took a direct hit.
GWEN IFILL: Despite the sweeping
destruction,
Tim Callaghan with the U.S.
Agency for International
Development, is holding out hope
that the
human cost may be less than
feared.
TIM CALLAGHAN, USAID: The damage
observed
from the air was structural
damage and not
heavy rain damage.
A lot of people were not
observed in the aerial
overflight, which would indicate
that people
were in shelters or people were
in homes.
GWEN IFILL: Eastern Cuba is also
assessing
damage from the hurricane's
passage, and,
overnight, the storm blew
through the Bahamas,
too.
The U.S. mainland is the next
target, with
Matthew expected to blast north
along the
entire length of Florida's
Atlantic Coast
beginning tonight.
After that, it's likely to rake
Georgia and
South Carolina, before weakening
and veering
out to sea.
Overall, about two million
people in those
states are being warned to flee.
GOV.
RICK SCOTT (R), Florida:
Evacuate, evacuate,
evacuate.
GWEN IFILL: Florida Governor
Rick Scott was
out early and often today,
telling people
to leave.
GOV.
RICK SCOTT: Are you willing to
take a chance
to risk your life?
Are you willing to take a
gamble?
That's what you're doing.
If you're reluctant to evacuate,
just think
of all the people this storm has
already killed.
GWEN IFILL: Many heeded the
warnings, as heavy
rain began falling in Miami.
Interstate highways across the
region were
turned into one-way routes to
speed the exodus.
MAN: I'm thinking just to get as
far away
from the flood zone as possible.
GWEN IFILL: Others hastily
boarded up homes
and businesses, and thousands
checked into
shelters.
WOMAN: It's too risky to stay,
and just wanted
to stay safe and really hope we
have the grace
to accept the aftermath.
MAN: You cannot replace your
child's life
or your mom's life or your
kid's, dad's, anybody's
life.
Things are material.
You can always replace your
things.
GWEN IFILL: And whether they
were going or
staying, people everywhere
flocked to buy
gasoline, food and water.
The threat of Matthew is also
forcing widespread
cancellations and closures of
everything from
college football to theme parks
to airline
routes.
This afternoon, President Obama
declared a
state of emergency for Florida
and ordered
federal aid to help on
the-ground efforts
there.
The Federal Emergency Management
Agency, or
FEMA, has deployed people and
supplies there
and to Georgia and the
Carolinas.
I spoke to the agency
administrator coordinating
the federal response, Craig
Fugate, from FEMA
headquarters late this
afternoon.
I began by asking how FEMA
prepares for such
a massive storm.
CRAIG FUGATE, Administrator,
Federal Emergency
Management Agency: Well, we
basically get
ready based on the storm track,
potential
impacts and looking at four
states.
So, we divided up teams to go
into each of
the state emergency operation
centers, and
we have set up some supply bases
that can
support multiple states, so we
can shift to
wherever the heaviest impacts
are.
But we have been getting ready
for the storm
for the last couple of days,
just like a lot
of the states and local
governments have been
doing, before this storm makes
impact.
GWEN IFILL: So, you have been
trying to preposition
resources in places where they
might be needed.
How do you tell where that is,
the places
that might be -- it might be
needed, but might
also be the hardest-hit part of
the impact?
CRAIG FUGATE: Well, part of it
is looking
at the overall track guidance to
making some
decisions about, where can we
move things
close to, but not in the area of
impact, and
then shift it as we get more
information on
the storm track.
So, right now, we have moved
stuff into Albany
and Fort Bragg.
Working with the state of
Florida, we're actually
moving stuff down to their
operations center
where they have a big logistics
base in Orlando.
So we try to move as the storm
shifts to just
stay outside of the heavy-hit
areas, but close
enough where we're going to be
able to get
in quickly to support the state
and local
responders.
GWEN IFILL: What do you do when
the governor
of a state, for instance, of
Florida, said
evacuate, evacuate, evacuate,
and people don't
do it?
CRAIG FUGATE: Well, I have been
in that role
at the state level and at the
local level.
And that's one of our
challenges.
And that's one of the things you
can help,
explaining to people, showing
them the hazards.
But I think people understand we
don't have
enough certainty of track
forecast to tell
people, you're not going to be
at risk or
you're at risk.
We have to warn the area based
upon the forecast.
And sometimes it's not that bad,
and that's
actually good, because you can
go back home.
But if it is as bad as
forecasted, I have
actually listened to the 911
calls.
There will be a point tonight
where it's too
late, people cannot be rescued,
they didn't
go in time, they're going to run
out of options.
And, unfortunately, that means
they may lose
their lives.
This is all about life safety.
That's why we're so adamant
about getting
people to evacuate out of these
areas.
And, yes, if it's not bad, go
back home.
But you have something to go
back to.
We can always rebuild, but we
cannot replace
lives lost.
GWEN IFILL: What about coastal
infrastructure
like NASA launch pads, for
instance?
That's right at the center of
the potential
hit zone.
CRAIG FUGATE: Well, we have a
lot of critical
infrastructure.
You have NASA.
You have several military bases.
You have the Port of
Jacksonville.
You have Port Canaveral.
There's a lot of things that
have not been
through hurricane conditions in
a very long
time, if ever, for the life of
those structures.
So, again, we get ready for the
impacts.
We expect to have substantial
damage if that
eye wall is coming ashore at a
Category 4
or Category 3.
But we can't really do much
about that right
now.
What we can do is get people to
safety and
then be prepared to respond
afterwards to
begin the response.
GWEN IFILL: What have you
learned from past
disasters like Hurricane Hugo, I
think, 1989,
that prepares you for now?
CRAIG FUGATE: Well, one of the
things you
will see along this part of the
coast is,
as you get further north, storm
surge values
will now go -- I think you're
seeing in a
lot of areas 10 to 12 feet.
As you move into the Carolinas,
particularly
South Carolina and Northern
Georgia, it even
gets higher.
One of the things we saw in
Hurricane Hugo
is how far inland storm surge
can go, in some
cases over 30 feet of water that
went in miles
and flooded communities that
didn't even think
they were on the coast.
That's why it's important that
people heed
those evacuation orders,
particularly around
rivers and the tributaries like
the St. John's,
the St. Mary's, up through the
Savannah River
and all those basins, because
water can travel
far inland and cause flooding
well away from
the coast, if people aren't
aware of it.
GWEN IFILL: Which is more
dangerous, or is
it possible to quantify it, the
actual landfall
or the surge that you're talking
about?
CRAIG FUGATE: If you go back in
history, the
most deadly parts of the
hurricane has been
water.
And the majority of that and the
large loss
of life has been due to storm
surge events
followed by heavy rainfall.
Wind is actually not as deadly
as people think
it is, although they tend to
look at the wind
field and look at that as a
risk.
What has historically killed
people in past
from hurricanes has been water,
storm surge.
That coastal flooding has been
the leading
cause of death.
And that's why we're so adamant
about getting
people to evacuate.
We spend a lot of time and
resources to map
those areas ahead of time.
But it only works if people heed
those evacuations
and go to higher ground.
GWEN IFILL: How many people
would you say
-- there are so many tourist
destinations
in this particular stretch of
the coast -- will
be stranded tonight as a result
or tomorrow?
CRAIG FUGATE: Well, they
shouldn't be stranded,
because, again, a lot of times,
as we work
at the local levels -- and this
is something
that when I was in the county in
Gainesville.
We used to worked with the
hotels and motels,
like when we would have football
games.
And most recently, we just got
the update
that the Florida-LSU game is
going to be postponed.
We look at our tourist as some
of the groups
we need to get out early.
Many times, they don't know the
plan.
They don't know where to go.
So we work with the local
visitors and convention
bureaus to make sure they get
out safely,
because that's one of the things
we have learned
in the tourism business.
The safety of our guests is of
paramount importance.
We want them to get to safety
first.
We will get the rest of the
population out
and then we get ready to start
the recovery
process.
GWEN IFILL: FEMA Administrator
Craig Fugate,
I know you have a long night
ahead of you.
Thank you for taking some time
for us.
CRAIG FUGATE: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: A second Atlantic
storm grew into
a hurricane today.
Nicole is some 330 miles south
of Bermuda,
with winds at 85 miles an hour.
For the moment, it is not a
threat to land.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: Syria's
military and its Russian allies
scaled back
airstrikes on Aleppo, but
President Bashar
al-Assad vowed to recapture all
of the city.
Meanwhile, Russia warned the
U.S. about launching
airstrikes against Assad's
forces.
The Defense Ministry suggested
Russian anti-aircraft
sites might have to fire on the
planes In
self-defense.
MAJ.
GEN.
IGOR KONASHENKOV, Russian
Ministry of Defense:
(through translator): Some
respected mass
media have published leaks
concerning discussions
in the White House on carrying
out strikes
on Syrian army positions.
One should realize that Russian
crews manning
air defense systems will not
have time to
detect the exact flight path of
missiles and
where they are from.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amid the
fighting, United Nations
special envoy Staffan de Mistura
warned there
may be nothing left of Aleppo by
year's end
unless the bombing stops.
GWEN IFILL: In Pakistan,
lawmakers voted today
to enact harsher penalties for
so-called honor
killings.
More than 1,000 Pakistani women
were murdered
last year by male relatives,
mostly for marrying
or dating without the family's
approval.
Current law allowed most of the
killers to
go free.
The new law imposes a 25-year
minimum prison
term.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Poland, the
Parliament has
overwhelmingly rejected a
complete ban on
abortions.
The proposal had sparked mass
protests by
women this week.
Today, the ruling Conservative
Party unexpectedly
withdrew its support for the
legislation.
But supporters insisted they
will keep trying.
MARIUSZ DZIERZAWSKI, Stop
Abortion (through
translator): Naturally, we will
not stop our
actions.
We have more and more
supporters, so we will
intensify our actions in the
nearest weeks
and months.
We will intensify our action.
It's not the first vote that we
lost in the
Parliament.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Poland is a
heavily Catholic
nation and already has one of
the strictest
abortion laws in Europe.
GWEN IFILL: Palestinian
President Mahmoud
Abbas had an emergency heart
procedure today
after suffering chest pains.
He was sent home a few hours
later, after
a doctor said tests came back
normal.
He told state-run TV:
"Everything is OK."
Abbas is 81, and has a history
of heart trouble.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The train that
crashed into
a Hoboken, New Jersey, station
last week,
and killed one person, was going
twice the
speed limit.
The National Transportation
Safety Board says
data recorders show the train
hit 21 miles
an hour in the last 30 seconds.
The engineer has said he has no
memory of
the crash.
GWEN IFILL: On Wall Street
today, the Dow
Jones industrial average lost 12
points to
close at 18268.
The Nasdaq fell nine points.
The S&P 500 added one.
And the price of oil topped $50
a barrel for
the first time since June.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the music
world is remembering
British songwriter Rod
Temperton, who turned
out some of the most popular
hits of the last
40 years.
His music publisher says he died
of cancer
last week in London.
Starting in the late '70s,
Temperton wrote
a long list of top 10 songs,
including "Boogie
Nights" and Michael Jackson's
mega-hit "Thriller."
Rod Temperton was 66 years old.
And we will always remember that
song.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the presidential
candidates' starkly different
views on guns;
why universities pay millions of
dollars to
host presidential debates; what
some are calling
a turning point in the fight
against climate
change; and much more.
With 33 days to go until
Election Day, we
turn now to the race for
president, where
a lot of the day's action took
place online
and on TV.
The next presidential debate is
set for this
weekend, and that made it a
quiet day at the
top of the tickets.
Hillary Clinton took part in
fund-raisers
in New York, and Donald Trump
scheduled a
town hall-style event this
evening in New
Hampshire.
The two candidates did send out
tweets voicing
concern for those in Hurricane
Matthew's path.
And both campaigns aired new TV
ads in key
states on children and families.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
We face big challenges.
But we can solve them the same
way families
do, working together, respecting
one another,
and never giving up.
I want our success to be
measured by theirs.
NARRATOR: What does electing
Donald Trump
president mean for you?
Families making $60,000 a year,
you get a
20 percent tax rate reduction.
Working moms, you get paid
maternity leave
and an average $5,000 child care
tax reduction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, the
running mates
were on the road in
Pennsylvania.
Republican Mike Pence toured the
Civil War
battlefield at Gettysburg.
Earlier, on NBC's "Today Show,"
he defended
his repeated denials, in Monday
night's debate,
of past statements by Donald
Trump.
GOV.
MIKE PENCE (R-IN), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
And the mischaracterizations and
the way Tim
Kaine and Hillary Clinton
continue to take
Donald Trump's statements out of
context,
it was something I just wasn't
going to tolerate
during the debate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clinton's number
two, Tim Kaine,
campaigned in Pittsburgh,
exhorting supporters
to keep Trump out of the White
House.
SEN.
TIM KAINE (D-VA), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
There's no room for second place
here.
There's no room for doubt here.
There's no silver medal in this
one.
We got to get the gold medal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, "The
Atlantic" offered
its endorsement in the
presidential campaign,
only the third time it's done
so, after Abraham
Lincoln and Lyndon Johnson.
The magazine backed Clinton and
branded Trump
-- quote -- "the most
ostentatiously unqualified
major party candidate in
history."
Later, 30 former Republican
members of Congress
published a letter urging
Republicans not
to vote for Trump.
Neither Trump nor Clinton has
any public events
scheduled for tomorrow, ahead of
Sunday night's
debate in Saint Louis.
And late today, France's
President Francois
Hollande said that he hopes
Hillary Clinton
wins in November.
He told a Paris audience, "There
isn't even
a choice."
GWEN IFILL: Now we continue our
series on
issues shaping this election.
Tonight, we focus on guns.
John Yang reports.
JOHN YANG: In their first
debate, a rare moment
of harmony, as the two
presidential candidates
actually agreed on a highly
contentious subject:
guns.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
We finally need to pass a
prohibition on anyone
who's on the terrorist watch
list from being
able to buy a gun in our
country.
If you're too dangerous to fly,
you are too
dangerous to buy a gun.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I agree with you.
When a person is on a watch list
or a no-fly
list -- and I have the
endorsement of the
NRA, which I'm very proud of.
These are very, very good
people, and they're
protecting the Second Amendment.
But I think we have to look very
strongly
at no-fly lists and watch lists.
JOHN YANG: But that's where the
agreement
ends.
Donald Trump is running as a
strong defender
of gun rights and says Hillary
Clinton wants
to take guns away.
Last month, Trump said, if
Clinton wants to
restrict access to guns, she
should start
with her Secret Service detail.
DONALD TRUMP: I think that her
bodyguards
should drop all weapons.
They should disarm, right?
Right?
I think they should disarm
immediately.
What do you think?
She doesn't want guns.
Take their -- let's see what
happens to her.
Take their guns away.
JOHN YANG: The National Rifle
Association
is running ads supporting Trump.
NARRATOR: She keeps a firearm in
this safe
for protection.
But Hillary Clinton could take
away her right
to self-defense, and, with
Supreme Court justices,
Hillary can.
JOHN YANG: Clinton says she just
wants tougher
gun control.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I'm not
here to repeal
the Second Amendment.
I'm not here to take away your
guns.
I just don't want you to be shot
by someone
who shouldn't have a gun in the
first place.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: She vows to expand
background checks
for gun buyers by closing the
Internet sales
and gun show loopholes, using
executive orders
if Congress won't act.
After the Pulse nightclub
shooting in Orlando,
Clinton doubled down.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I
believe weapons
of war have no place on our
streets.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: And we
may have our
disagreements about gun safety
regulations,
but we should all be able to
agree on a few
essential things.
JOHN YANG: Clinton has used
urban gun violence
to give urgency and a human face
to her call
for stricter gun control.
Earlier this year, she spoke at
a fund-raiser
for the Circle of Mothers, a
group that supports
women whose children have been
killed by gun
violence.
This week, she spoke about the
issue at a
black church in Charlotte, North
Carolina.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: We have
to fight for
commonsense reforms to stop the
epidemic of
gun violence in our communities.
(APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Gun
violence is by
far the leading cause of death
for young black
men, more than the next nine
causes combined.
JOHN YANG: Adam Winkler is a
UCLA Law professor.
ADAM WINKLER, UCLA Law
Professor: All of Secretary
Clinton's proposals are at the
very top of
the gun control agenda,
universal background
checks, restrictions on assault
weapons, and
things like a no-buy list for
terrorists.
JOHN YANG: Trump opposes
restrictions on assault
weapons and increased background
checks.
He says if a gun owner has a
permit to carry
a concealed weapon, it should
apply nationwide.
ADAM WINKLER: It would
effectively mean that
a state that has the easiest,
loosest, most
permissive carry laws will set
the laws for
the entire nation.
This would be a radical reform
of America's
gun laws, undermining states'
right and lead
to far more people carrying
guns.
JOHN YANG: Immediately after the
Pulse nightclub,
Trump said more guns would have
helped.
DONALD TRUMP: If you had some
guns in that
club the night that this took
place, if you
had guns on the other side, you
wouldn't have
had the tragedy that you had.
JOHN YANG: After the Sandy Hook
school shooting,
Trump tweeted that President
Obama's call
for stricter gun control spoke
for him and
every American.
Now Trump wants to eliminate
gun-free zones
around schools and parks.
The fate of either candidates'
proposals is
likely to rest with whoever
controls Congress.
So, no matter who wins the White
House in
November, the battle over gun
control isn't
likely to end.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This week,
Longwood University
in rural Virginia took its turn
under the
hot lights of the presidential
campaign.
Tonight, we unpack the decision
and the kind
of money that goes into choosing
which schools
host a debate, and what remains
when everyone
leaves campus.
Special correspondent Roben
Farzad has this
week's Making Sense, which airs
every Thursday.
ROBEN FARZAD: Farmville,
Virginia, has a population
of just over 8,000.
But that swelled this week as
hordes of journalists,
political operatives and
security details
crammed into town and onto
Longwood University.
Staging a debate broadcast to 37
million viewers
brings the kind of media
spotlight most colleges
cannot fathom.
Many just can't afford it.
But past debate site hosts
estimate the attention
is equivalent to $45 million to
$50 million
of paid advertising.
TAYLOR REVELEY, President,
Longwood University:
Hosting one of these crucial
debates is a
genuinely once-in-a-lifetime
opportunity.
ROBEN FARZAD: Longwood President
Taylor Reveley
is a presidential scholar
himself and the
third member of his family to
run a Virginia
university.
The debate cost Longwood, a
public institution,
about $5.5 million, including $2
million paid
to the Commission on
Presidential Debates.
He says that specially earmarked
fund-raising,
not student fees or scholarship
funds, financed
Longwood's debate effort, adding
that the
buzz around the debate increased
the number
of alumni donors by almost 25
percent this
year.
TAYLOR REVELEY: The general
election season
is like a Super Bowl buy, but,
in reality,
it's much more than that.
For our students, this is a
genuinely once-in-a-lifetime
opportunity to see history
unfold.
It takes a volunteer army to
pull off this
kind of event.
So much of the rest of the world
would deeply
envy to have candidates in a
democracy showing
up on a stage together shaking
hands.
ROBEN FARZAD: This is town where
a lot has
happened.
From colonial times to the Civil
War to the
civil rights movement, Farmville
and Longwood
University have been no
strangers to history.
In 1865, Confederate General
Robert E. Lee
surrendered to Ulysses S. Grant
just up the
road at Appomattox Court House.
A century later, in a defining
showdown of
the civil rights movement, black
high school
students protesting segregation
joined the
landmark Supreme Court case
Brown v. Board
of Education.
Janet Brown heads the Commission
on Presidential
Debates.
JANET BROWN, Executive Director,
Commission
on Presidential Debates: These
are historic.
Each is unique.
They are memorable.
They give the students, as well
as the university
or college community, a chance
to participate
in something unlike anything
else that they
will see.
ROBEN FARZAD: Up to five dozen
schools apply
to hold one of these debates
every general
election.
If you're a winner, you pay the
commission
production fees and a whole lot
more.
This summer, Wright State pulled
out of the
running to host the first
presidential debate,
citing worries about costs and
security.
In its place, Hofstra University
hosted its
third debate.
Brown says there are returns to
a school beyond
the bottom line.
JANET BROWN: There are returns
on reputation
certainly for the school.
I will tell you one that is not
well-covered,
and I find it fascinating.
This is an example of management
and leadership,
in terms of the team effort that
is required
to put this together.
ROBEN FARZAD: Centre College in
Danville,
Kentucky, thought the experience
of hosting
the vice presidential debate in
2000 was so
worthwhile that it came back for
seconds in
2012.
Centre College continues to
benefit, according
to the school spokesman Michael
Strysick.
MICHAEL STRYSICK, Spokesperson,
Centre College:
The debate keeps on giving.
A year later, two years later,
if the candidates
are in the news, they end up
using photos
from the debate that end up
providing media
value.
What I would caution to debate
hosts is to
not look for an immediate return
on the investment,
but perhaps to be mindful of
what Ben Franklin
called the eighth wonder of the
world, compound
interest.
ROBEN FARZAD: Assuming, of
course, the candidates
remember the name of your
school.
GOV.
MIKE PENCE (R-IN), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
Thank you to Norwood University
for their
wonderful hospitality.
ROBEN FARZAD: Even before
Pence's flub, veteran
ad executive John Adams tempered
talk of return
on investment, audience reach,
and media impressions.
JOHN ADAMS, Advertising
Executive: Longwood
is not the star of the show
here.
Longwood is the setting.
Longwood is the venue.
Obviously, there's a great deal
of name awareness
that gets built as a result of
it.
And we will see beautiful
pictures of the
university and so forth.
But the real test is, what does
that name
awareness and what does -- the
rub-off, positive
rub-off over time?
ROBEN FARZAD: The same holds
true for the
potential boost to town
commerce.
I stopped by Uptown Coffee Cafe
in Farmville
and talked to owner Jason
Mattox.
How do you stockpile?
How do you prepare for something
that's largely
unknown?
What do you buy?
JASON MATTOX, Owner, Uptown
Coffee Cafe: We
have had our kitchen manager
really prepare
the back.
We have got extra cheese slices.
We have got extra deli meats
ready.
We have put a shed out back for
our disposables.
We ordered extra coffee beans.
Either we're going to be really
prepared and
never run out, or we're going to
scrape the
bottom.
And I'm hoping we will scrape
the bottom.
ROBEN FARZAD: Back on campus,
organizers were
pulling out all the stops, from
voter registration,
to academic lectures on the
foundations of
democracy, to engaging all ages
in the presidential
election, from preschoolers to
high-schoolers
from around the state, to
raffling tickets
to the actual debate, and a tour
of the area's
civil rights landmarks.
Joy Cabarrus Speakes was one of
the students
who walked out of Farmville's
Moton High School.
It was considered the student
birthplace of
America's civil rights movement
for providing
a majority of the plaintiffs in
the Brown
v. Board of Education case.
The debate put a spotlight on
that history.
JOY CABARRUS SPEAKES,
Participated in Moton
High School Walkout: It's
bringing a lot of
information on the civil rights
movement to
the nation, because a lot of
people never
even knew about Prince Edward
County.
They never knew about the story.
Now it's going to bring it front
and center,
you know, to the world.
SEN.
TIM KAINE (D-VA), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
This is a very special place.
ROBEN FARZAD: In fact,
Democratic vice presidential
candidate Tim Kaine made
reference to that
rich history at the debate.
SEN.
TIM KAINE: Barbara Johns led a
walkout of
her high school, Moton High
School.
She made history by protesting
school segregation.
ROBEN FARZAD: It's that kind of
civic and
academic engagement that
Longwood's president
hopes will keep paying
dividends.
TAYLOR REVELEY: We have been in
the midst
of revising our core curriculum,
which is
a process that runs a number of
years.
We had been working on it for 18
months before
we knew about the debate.
And now we have used the debate
to essentially
run pilot courses for what the
new curriculum
that's really going to have
citizenship as
its North Star.
ROBEN FARZAD: After spending
millions in two
years on debate planning,
Longwood is banking
on the country remembering its
name.
In Farmville, Virginia, I'm
Roben Farzad for
the "PBS NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: Online, we have your
guide to
what to watch for in the
presidential debate
Sunday at Washington University
in Saint Louis.
We will have special live
coverage beginning
at 9:00 p.m. Eastern.
LLOYD BENTSEN (D), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
Senator, you are no Jack
Kennedy.
GERALDINE FERRARO (D), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
I almost resent, Vice President
Bush, your
patronizing...
MITT ROMNEY (R), Presidential
Candidate: Whole
binders full of women.
MICHAEL DUKAKIS (D),
Presidential Candidate:
That I have opposed the death
penalty during
all of my life.
JOHN YANG: Interact with all the
general election
debates on our Web site,
watchthedebates.org.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
role drug
companies play in the opioid
epidemic; Stephen
King reveals his writing
process; and a man
uses his own tragedy to help
others facing
death.
But first: The international
climate agreement
is set to take effect next month
after enough
countries pushed it past a key
threshold this
week.
The European Parliament voted to
ratify the
accord.
That means that more than 60
countries, accounting
for at least 55 percent of the
world's greenhouse
gas emissions, have ratified it.
The agreement, reached in Paris
less than
a year ago, aims to lessen the
effects of
climate change.
But the commitments are
voluntary.
President Obama, who pushed for
the deal,
hailed the moment in the Rose
Garden yesterday.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Today's a historic day in the
fight to protect
our planet for future
generations.
Ten months ago in Paris, I said
before the
world that we needed a strong
global agreement
to reduce carbon pollution and
to set the
world on a low-carbon course.
Now, the Paris agreement alone
will not solve
the climate crisis.
Even if we meet every target
embodied in the
agreement, we will only get to
part of where
we need to go.
But make no mistake, this
agreement will help
delay or avoid some of the worst
consequences
of climate change.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hillary Clinton
also supports
the accord.
But Donald Trump has said he
would withdraw
from it and he called it a bad
deal.
In a statement, his deputy
policy director
wrote it -- quote -- "ignores
the reality
that it will cost the American
economy trillions
of dollars.
It will also impose enormous
costs on American
households through higher
electricity prices
and higher taxes.
More of our coal miners will be
forced out
of work."
We look closer now at what takes
effect under
the treaty, the limits of what
can be done,
and what climate science says
about carbon
dioxide and warming.
Gavin Schmidt is a climatologist
and he's
the director of NASA's Goddard
Institute for
Space Studies.
Gavin Schmidt, welcome to the
"NewsHour."
What is the significance of this
accord, when
even the president of the United
States, who's
a supporter, says it's only
going to get us
part of the way we need to go?
GAVIN SCHMIDT, Director, NASA
Goddard Institute
for Space Studies: Well, like
the old proverb
says, a journey of 1,000 miles
starts with
a single global agreement.
And this is where we're at.
We have an agreement now that
encompasses
-- that's in effect that
encompasses every
country in the world.
Every country in the world is
thinking that
this is something that they need
to get behind.
Every country has promised to
reduce emissions
to the level that they signed up
for.
While President Obama is correct
that, in
and of itself, this is not going
to stop global
warming, that's a much bigger
task.
But this is a step in that right
direction.
And what the hope is, is that,
with experience,
with seeing the best practices
that other
countries have adopted, great
ideas, new technologies,
that people will be able to
increase their
commitments under this agreement
at each of
the next update stages, which
come every few
years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But how do you --
how confident
are you, though, that you are
going to be
able to even take that baby
step, when you
still have critics out there
saying things
like, this is going to raise
people's electricity
bills, fundamental costs of
living, that it's
going to take jobs away in the
fossil fuel
industry?
GAVIN SCHMIDT: So, but then
there are jobs
going to be created in renewable
fuels.
There are going to be jobs
created in new
technologies that are more
efficient.
There are many different things
that are happening,
both in building resiliency to
future climate
change, but also building the
infrastructure
of the future that is ongoing
right now.
I think you can get a little bit
caught up
with the supposed balance
between the economy
or the environment.
I think that these things
actually aren't
opposed, for the most part.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, this week,
Gavin Schmidt,
we saw one of the world's most
important sites
for measuring carbon dioxide
levels tell us
levels now recently have risen
above a symbolically
important figure of 400 parts
per million.
This was a site in Hawaii.
GAVIN SCHMIDT: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: They say it's
likely to stay
that way for the indefinite
future.
I guess my question is, how
important is this?
I mean, as scientists work on
this issue,
do you feel it's just a constant
uphill battle?
GAVIN SCHMIDT: So, you have to
remember what
the context is here.
The pre-industrial level, so
where we were
in the 19th century, was 280
parts per million;
400 parts per million is a 40
percent increase
over that, and this is a level
that hasn't
been seen in the climate since
perhaps the
Pliocene period, which was three
million years
ago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, in other
words...
GAVIN SCHMIDT: It's a big deal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you're saying
it's a big
deal, but you can't get
discouraged about
something like that?
GAVIN SCHMIDT: Well, so, what's
happening
is that we are already a
geological force
on the climate.
You know, the fingerprint of
human activity
on the climate, not just in
carbon dioxide,
but in many, many other aspects,
is very,
very clear.
The agreements like the Paris
agreement and
efforts that are going on not
just at the
national, but at the state and
city and individual
levels, are attempts to kind of
make that
not quite as large an impact as
we have already
had.
But it's a tough vote.
I mean, to stabilize, so just to
keep carbon
dioxide levels at the same level
in perpetuity,
we would need to reduce
emissions by 80 percent
globally.
That's a huge task, and it's not
something
that's going to be accomplished
today, or
tomorrow or in one electoral
cycle.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, at a time,
Mr. Schmidt,
when I think many of us
certainly in the United
States are focused on this big
hurricane heading
for the United States mainland,
this has to
give -- and we know scientists
have spoken
about this, these big storms,
the concern
that they're going to get even
bigger.
GAVIN SCHMIDT: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How should
Americans and others
think about climate change in
the face of
something like this?
GAVIN SCHMIDT: So, one of the
key things is
sea level rise.
So, sea level has risen about 10
foot, is
actually rising faster on the
Eastern Seaboard
than elsewhere.
For every extra foot of sea
level rise, a
storm surge, even if the climate
of storms
doesn't change, the storm surge
has more damage.
There is many, many thresholds,
that, you
know, if the water rises five
foot, you're
fine, but if it goes up six
feet, then it
overtops a levee, it over -- it
floods a subway.
It has much greater damages.
So, sea level rise is one of
those aspects
of change that multiply the
damages that are
caused by just the natural
variation of climate
and the natural variation of
hurricanes and
storms that we see.
Plus, we have some expectation
that hurricanes
themselves and storms themselves
will become
more intense, perhaps less
frequent, but more
intense, and then that,
obviously, adds to
the damages as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's an
occasion to think
about all of this and to think
about the interconnection.
Gavin Schmidt with the Goddard
Institute for
Space Studies, we thank you.
GAVIN SCHMIDT: Thank you very
much.
GWEN IFILL: The abuse of opioids
remains a
major public health concern
around the country.
The federal government says more
than 28,000
people died by overdose in 2014.
That's the most recent year for
nationwide
data.
The health news site STAT has
been reporting
on the problem and what has been
driving it.
Journalist David Armstrong sat
down with Hari
Sreenivasan recently.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David, your
investigation
looks at a number of big
pharmaceutical countries
that you say helped sow the
seeds for some
of this epidemic that we have
today.
How so?
DAVID ARMSTRONG, STAT: Well, the
way they
sowed the seeds was by making
this drug widely
used.
And the way they did that was to
downplay
the addictive properties of this
drug when
marketing it to doctors, in a
way that was
later shown to be false and
misleading.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, doctors
can prescribe
drugs off-label for something
that it wasn't
originally designed to, but how
were the pharma
companies abusing this?
DAVID ARMSTRONG: Well, they were
primarily
abusing it in the way they were
assuring doctors
that these powerful opioids that
are a controlled
substance would not be addictive
in the way
that they later proved to be
addictive and
could be used for things like
chronic pain,
which we now know they're not
very effective
at.
So they were able to broaden the
market through
a series of misrepresentations
and through
a series of aggressive marketing
tactics.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How much money
are we talking
about?
What did they stand to gain?
DAVID ARMSTRONG: Well, let's
just look at
OxyContin.
When that came on the market in
1996, sales
of the drug were about $50
million.
By 2002, sales of this drug were
$1.6 billion,
and they have continued at that
clip ever
since, exceeding well over $30
billion in
sales.
That's just one drug.
So that gives you an idea of the
scale here
of the amount of money involved.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You were also
able to take
a look at documents through
Freedom of Information
Act requests that were sealed
that show how
these drugs were being marketed.
Explain that.
DAVID ARMSTRONG: Yes.
So, one of the interesting
things is, in the
case of OxyContin, Purdue
Pharma, which manufactures
the drug, and its partner in
marketing at
Abbott Laboratories, they were
sued over 1,000
times collectively for problems
related to
this drug.
But in a lot of those cases, in
fact, the
vast majority of them, the
documents involved
in those cases were either
destroyed or sealed.
So we have been trying to unseal
some of those
in several jurisdictions, and we
have been
successful.
So, in West Virginia, for
instance, we saw
some of the tactics that Abbott
used.
They did things like a
dine-and-dash program.
This is where they would meet a
doctor at
a restaurant, pay for his
takeout order, and
while waiting to pay for the
order, sell him
on the benefits of OxyContin.
And then we wrote about a
doctor, a surgeon
who had a sweet tooth, a
fondness for junk
food.
And these salespeople brought
him a sheet
cake filled with donuts and
snack cakes spelled
out to say OxyContin.
And that did the trick.
He was interested in hearing
more about the
drug at that point, and they
would go back
every week and get him to switch
patients
over to OxyContin.
Those are just a few of the
things.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And the sales
reps were
rewarded for these tactics?
DAVID ARMSTRONG: Very
generously.
They were rewarded with luxury
trips.
There were $20,000 scratch
tickets that were
sent out to them as rewards.
So the compensation was very
lucrative to
get these doctors to switch
patients to these
powerful opioids.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There are
people who do
need significant pain
medications.
I mean, they're the ones who
kind of get the
short end of the stick as this
abuse happens.
What's the government's role in
oversight
of this?
DAVID ARMSTRONG: Well, you're
now seeing,
because we're dealing with a
public health
crisis -- we have tens of
thousands of people
dying each year now from these
overdoses.
You're seeing governments, state
governments
in particular, move to restrict
the prescription,
primarily in making sure that
prescriptions
are a limited number of days.
Before, they would be 30, 60
days, and there
would be plenty of pills left
over.
And those would get misused.
So that's one way, and also
educating prescribers.
Nobody wants to see a
prohibition of painkillers
for people who need them, but
one of the keys
is to make sure doctors are
educated in who
truly need them and they are
prescribing the
right amount and the right drug.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
David Armstrong
of STAT joining us from Boston,
thanks so
much.
DAVID ARMSTRONG: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: He is the author of
"Carrie,"
"The Shining, "Misery," and so
many more classic
and frightening tales.
In the latest addition to the
"NewsHour" Bookshelf,
Stephen King, master of the
supernatural and
suspense, reflects on the art of
writing and
his latest novel, "End of
Watch."
He spoke with Jeffrey Brown
recently at the
National Book Festival here in
Washington
JEFFREY BROWN: "End of Watch,"
the end of
a trilogy, right?
STEPHEN KING, Author, "End of
Watch": Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Does a trilogy
start life as
a trilogy?
STEPHEN KING: That's a very good
question.
Actually, no.
I thought that the first book in
the trilogy,
"Mr. Mercedes," would be the
only book.
And I kind of didn't want to let
the characters
go, the main characters.
So I had an idea for another
book, and realized
when I was working on that that
I had unfinished
business from the first book.
So I had a nice rounded quality,
the three
of them.
JEFFREY BROWN: So you didn't
know where you
were heading, right?
I mean, did you know -- even
when you start
a character in the first book,
Mr. Mercedes,
do you know where that was
going?
STEPHEN KING: No, I didn't.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: ... with you?
You don't know where -- you
don't know?
STEPHEN KING: I very rarely --
sometimes,
I have an idea of how the book
will finish
up, but it very rarely finishes
up the way
that I think it's going to.
You have to go where the book
leads you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
And what about a character?
STEPHEN KING: There is a
novelist called Thomas
Williams, who's passed on now,
and he said
that the idea for a novel is
like a little
tiny fire in a dark night.
And, one by one, the characters
come and stand
around it and warm their hands.
And I have always thought that's
the perfect
metaphor for how it works.
JEFFREY BROWN: Come around
together and warm
their hands.
STEPHEN KING: They stand around
the fire.
And little by little, the fire
grows.
And you see them more clearly.
And that's the novel.
JEFFREY BROWN: And the story
grows.
STEPHEN KING: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: You wrote a very
lovely book
that I read years ago on writing
about your
own life and the craft of
writing.
And you wrote in there, "The
writer's original
perception of a character or
characters may
be as erroneous as the
reader's."
STEPHEN KING: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, this is the
sense of what
you're talking about.
STEPHEN KING: It is.
Here's an example of that.
There's a character in "Mr.
Mercedes," the
first book of the Hodges
Trilogy, a woman
named Holly Gibney.
And as far as I was concerned,
she was just
going to be a walk-on character.
She's going to come on.
She's going to be a little
neurotic, and there
is going to be some discussion
with him.
And then she was going to
disappear from view,
a minor character.
And, instead, she came in and
took over the
whole book.
And I let her because that's
what needed to
happen.
The worst thing you can try to
do is to steer
the story once it gets going.
You just kind of follow along
and see where
it goes.
That's the fun.
JEFFREY BROWN: That's the fun of
it.
STEPHEN KING: That's the fun of
it, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: And it still is
fun for you?
STEPHEN KING: Not every day, but
most days,
it is, yes.
I go where the story leads.
And, sometimes, it is a little
bit outrageous.
And I relish that.
I sort of want to be as much on
the edge as
I can.
And I want to engage the reader.
I'm an emotional writer, in the
sense that
I would be happy if you re-read
a book for
the intellectual or the mental
part of it,
but, the first time, I just like
to reach
out and grab you, pull you in.
JEFFREY BROWN: You know, another
thing that
struck me, again going back to
the book on
writing, you say: "Let's get one
thing clear
right now, shall we?
There is no idea dump, no
central story, no
island of buried bestsellers,"
which is to
say that stories almost come
from just out
there, right?
And your job is to, what, find
them?
STEPHEN KING: I don't think you
find them,
exactly.
I think what you do is, you keep
your sensors
open.
And it's -- the more that you do
the job,
the more you come to understand
in a kind
of intuitive way that you're
always -- you
know, your radar is on.
And the thing is going around
and around and
around.
And it's not picking up any
blips.
And then something will happen,
and it will
click, and you will say, this is
an idea for
a story.
And, for me, I'm usually working
on something,
so that's kind of got to go to
the end of
the line.
And the best thing about that
is, is that
the bad ideas kind of just drop
out of the
mix.
You forget about them.
The good ones stick around.
So...
JEFFREY BROWN: So, does that
mean writing
can be taught, can be learned?
STEPHEN KING: It can be learned,
but I'm not
sure it can be taught.
It's a self-taught kind of
thing.
I think the best writers are
voracious readers
who pick up the cadences and the
feel of narration
through a number of different
books.
And you begin by maybe copying
the style of
writers that really knocked you
out.
I mean, as a teenager, I read a
lot of H.P.
Lovecraft, so I wrote like H.P.
Lovecraft.
And in my 20s, I read a lot of
Ross Macdonald
and Raymond Chandler, so I wrote
like those
guys.
But, little by little, you
develop your own
style.
JEFFREY BROWN: You describe in
"On Writing"
book about learning the
discipline, even the
place where you want to write,
things like
that?
STEPHEN KING: Yes.
There's a kind of self-hypnosis
involved with
it, too.
If you start at the same time
every day -- most
writers have little routines
they go through.
I like to always stop with a
couple of pages
that I haven't -- that are just
raw copy,
where I haven't touched it, I
haven't tried
to revise it, I haven't tried to
polish it.
It's like having a little bit of
a runway.
The next day when you sit down,
you have the
comfort of saying, well, I have
got a little
bit here, used to be in the
typewriter.
Now it's in the magic box, the
computer.
JEFFREY BROWN: I see.
So, it's not an empty slate as
you start the
next day?
STEPHEN KING: Cold start is a
hard start.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: So, let me ask
you one more
thing.
Can you imagine stopping
writing, not writing?
STEPHEN KING: Well, when people
say, what
scares you, because I have
written a lot of
horror novels.
JEFFREY BROWN: You have written
some scary
novels.
STEPHEN KING: Yes.
I say, what really scares me is
Alzheimer's
or premature senility, losing
that ability
to read and enjoy and to write.
And you do it, and some days
maybe aren't
so good, and then some days, you
really catch
a wave, and it's as good as it
ever was.
So, it's tough to imagine giving
it up.
JEFFREY BROWN: Stephen King,
thank you very
much.
STEPHEN KING: Thank you.
Pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to another of
our Brief
But Spectacular series, where we
ask interesting
people to share their passions.
Tonight, we hear from B.J.
Miller, a palliative
care doctor in the San Francisco
Bay Area.
He explains how working in end
of life care
can help inform the way we live.
DR.
B.J. MDNM /MILLER, Zen Hospice
Project:
When people find out I'm in
palliative care,
first of all, many people -- you
start with,
well, oh, well, what is that?
The interdisciplinary pursuit of
quality of
life, and the context is always
advanced or
serious illness.
Palliative care is irrespective
of the clock.
You don't have to be dying
anytime soon.
The curiosity from the public
tends to be
-- and I hear this all the time
-- wow, you
know, that must be so
depressing.
You know, you must be depressed
all the time.
It's not always happy, by a long
shot, but
there is this side effect that
seems to come.
By facing mortality, it seems to
inform how
you live.
So, the secret is that facing
death has a
lot to do with living well.
The whole reason I went into
medicine was
because I became a patient.
In college, sophomore year, my
dear friends
and I were horsing around one
night.
We decided to climb a parked
train.
I happened to have a metal watch
on, and the
-- and, when I stood up, the
electricity arced
to the watch, and that was that.
It was sort of an introduction
to my own death,
my own sense of mortality, my
own finiteness.
You're the object of a lot of
sympathy, pity,
a lot of head-tilts.
At first, it's kind of sweet,
but then it
starts turning a little
saccharine.
You quickly look down that road,
and it's
not too long before you realize
that's a dead
end.
That's just another way of
removing yourself
or being removed from the flow
of society.
One of the ways that I got
through some of
the early days was insisting
that this was
a variation on a theme we all
experience,
and that theme is -- basically
is suffering.
Some way, life is not going to
do what you
want it to do.
Your body is not going to do
what you want
it to do.
You will suffer.
It's unavoidable.
And there is this unnecessary
rind of suffering,
which is so -- which is the
demoralizing part,
because it's the invented stuff.
It comes in terms of how we
treat each other,
sometimes poorly.
It comes in those moments of
abandonment.
We end up warehousing folks who
are sitting
on piles of wisdom and
experience and just
plain hilarious or good stories.
If we could sort of shift that a
little bit,
there's a lot more peace waiting
for all of
us as we age.
I think a lot of us are really
worried, not
so much about the fact that we
die, but how
we die.
Very often, patients themselves,
the people
doing the dying, will get to a
place of acceptance,
beyond acceptance even, you
know, ready to
go.
You're done.
You're done with this body.
A lot of the effort, my effort,
the team's
effort, the hospice
organization's effort,
is actually not so much on the
patient, the
person doing the dying.
It's on the family.
In a way, it's harder to accept
the death
of another person than accept
your own, especially
when you really love that
person.
I'm B.J. Miller.
And this is my Brief But
Spectacular take
on tying dying and living.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You can watch
additional Brief
But Spectacular episodes on our
Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: A columnist expresses the
trauma and
terror people of color
experience by watching
videos of unarmed black men
being killed by
police.
You can find that and more on
our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Friday, our series The Fight
for Iraq concludes
with a report from the front
lines in Fallujah.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
with Mark Shields and Michael
Gerson.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.